Hey folks previously, I mentioned
code on the beach. That
same group is hosting a
conference on a cruise ship
code on the sea. It's
a five day cruise from
Jacksonville, Florida to the Hamas
stopping in Nassau and half
moon K from February 28th through
March 5th, 2015 are these sessions are
going to be held on
sea days. So you'll have
enough time with your family.
Plenty of time on the
ship, explore The Bahamas through some
excursions, and then you'll get
to soak in that warm
weather in early March. It's
sounding better than spending the
week back home where it's
cold speakers will include Eric Meyer,
Michael feathers, and Greg young.
So check out code on
the c@codeontheseat.com and you can
save $150 with coupon code
Hanselman. Now, again, that website
is code on the c.com.
Check it out From hanselminutes.com.
It's Hansel minutes, all weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologist Scott Hanselman. This is
Lawrence Ryan announcing show number four
32. In this episode, Scott
talks with David  about
learning web GL and making
3d HTML game. Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman, and this
is another episode of Hansel
minutes, and we're going to
be talking about web GL
and the Babylon JS engine
with David Ketchu. How are
you, sir? And fan, thank
you very much for inviting
me. No, absolutely. My pleasure.
So I'm trying to get
my head around all these
different API APIs. You know,
it seems like in the
last few years, browsers have
exploded and the number of
things that they can do
from Gigio location and simple
API is like that to
more deep API, like web
GL, would you consider web
GL to be part of
what we say when we
say HTML five? Absolutely. It's
broader than as to HTML
five, but yeah, for the
sake of simplification, we can
say that it's part of
his team. And when I
go to the, can I
use website, can I use.com/web
GL? It seems like a
while. There's not necessarily broad
support, particularly around mobile, near
future. It is going to
include iOS. That seems like
the beginning of the broad,
broad adoption of web GL.
Absolutely. It started with Chrome
and Firefox. And then I
E and right now we
have web GL on windows
phone on almost all Android
stuff and have the announcement
of Apple moving on to
iOS. Yes, we can say
that right now. We have
powerful tools to do three
D almost everywhere. When, when
someone thinking about canvas, when
someone makes a canvas and
just wants to draw a
circle, this would be 2d.
They would do this just
with the canvas API. Yeah,
I think so. We have
some good frameworks around there,
like created JS, which also
use where did she ever
as a tool for accelerate
too deep, but you can
do that directly using the
canvas and it tweaked be
in a way accelerated by
the browser you can use
to the office. Okay. And
this, this idea of what's
Excelerate, and what's not, it's
becoming a big, a big
discussion. I had a chat
with Christian Heilmann recently where
he talked about the differences
between doing animations in CSS
three and doing them in
jQuery and how dramatic there's
dramatic improvements when you use
an API that the browser
is aware of at a
hardware level and can then
say, Oh, I can use
the GPU. I can use
the, the graphics card for
this. Yeah, absolutely. And it's
a real challenge for web
developers today. I hope that
in the near future, on
jQuery, we will be able
to detect that so many
missions can be done with
CSS. And I think for
part of them, it's already
the case. We did the
same thing. We've when GS
some of the animation of
wind JSR just done using
CSS three and emissions. So
yeah, it's a bit complicated
today, but Hey, hop, it
will be simpler in the
near future. I see people
talking about CSS in the
context of 3d. When should
someone do their CSS or
do an animation in CSS
and a 3d trans transform
versus when is it time
to jump to web GL?
Let's say that for simple
things like rotating some DV,
or just adding some kind
of perspective to your, to
your page, it could be
easily done with CSS, really
transform because mainly ECS is
transforming, just applying a metrics,
the three D metrics to
you live. If you want
to go further, I mean,
adding more complex object, something
that it's not a square,
but like a ship, whatever
you want, you need to
go to. Okay. So if
I was going to draw
a square and rotated or
translate it or scale it
in X, Y, or Z,
these are all very reasonable
things to do with the
transform property and Oh yeah.
And you will get right
off the, all the burden
of using webcam, because where
does you add is not
easy to use. It's lonely
and it's not easy to
use. Yeah. But if I
wanted to dry cube something
that actually has depth, then
if I wanted to do
that in CSS, it becomes
more of a challenge. And
I assume I would then
have to start thinking about
the Z axis, which I
don't really think about in
the NCSS. Absolutely. And you
have to think about what
we call the present three
D, which mean that the
back plane is not drone
on top of the phone
plane. We have to deal
with kind of, that will
slowly draw you to use
a website. Okay. So talk
more about preserved 3d and
why that's It's important because
if you want to drill
to draw in three D
we need to have some
kind of depth buffer. I
mean, you need to ensure
that the pixel you are
drawing is in front of
the previous pixel. And to
do that, we have a
tool using CSS called ,
which means that if a
plane is drawn and displaying,
his father had under plane,
which is done on top
of it, then all the
3d will be preserved. So
you will have the feeling
of a three D because
everything will be drawn in
the right order. I see.
So then that transform style
value that you would put
on a div can be
either preserve 3d Or flat.
Absolutely. And if you don't
want to press up through
the age with just be,
as you said, I see.
And it sounds like that's
about as far as you
can go in, in, in
CSS. I mean, it, it
get provides some ability to
rotate and turn things around.
But if I were going
to draw something like a
sphere, it's definitely time to
get into. Oh yeah. It
would be really challenging. I
saw a lot of fixed
period, man, that only UCS
has, but it's just for
really genius guys. If you
want to really do three
D like a sphere contours,
whatever you need. I was
familiar early on with SVG.
And when I, as a,
as an old school HTML
person, I think about markup
first, I think about markup
first. So when I started
looking into web GL, I
started kind of searching around
and ignorantly. I was trying
to look for what do
the angle brackets look like?
And then I finally figured
out that web GL is
a JavaScript API entirely. There's
no angle bracket representation of
these objects, right? Absolutely. There
is a project launched by
the front of our university,
from Germany called , which
is exactly what you are
talking about as a group
set of HTML demands that
describe 3d scene. But right
now, if you're thinking about
can two MCL, it's like
comparing canvas and SVG, they
both drew to the stuff
on the screen. One is
based on a model like
the canvas, we just JavaScript
orders. And as it's more
about HTML elements right now,
we just have web GL,
which is the canvas for
three D and extra dome,
which is some kind of
visually from the sweetie. So
you're saying X the letter
X, the three, and then
the word, Absolutely. So this
is, Would you save in
a declarative 3d? It's a
way of saying here's a
scene, here's a viewport, here's
a background, here's a shape
and describing it. So in
the context of something like
XML that listeners might be
familiar with, I could use
a API and build the
tree procedurally, or I could
build the tree declaratively. And
you're saying that X three
Dom is the beginning of
the discussion around how to
describe a three D scene
declaratively, Sort of the, and
they are trying to make
it really a convenient to
use. You can think about
XAML when we, when we
introduced 3d in the summer,
it's almost the same thing.
We have a attack for
seeing attack from Iraq, for
materials, everything is declarative And
are people who work in
3d going to be familiar
with these terms, this idea
of like a scene and
a camera angle. So it
was web GL created with
those people in mind who
are already making 3d con
No, not at all. It's
really a low level, a
PA it's more like direct
text for the web. I
mean, you just have control
over a drawing, try and
go. And then you have
to define a global state
machine and you have to
specify really lowly other things
that communicate with the GPU,
meaning cheddar state, like alpha
manipulation of the geometry is
everything that it's not high
level at home. That's interesting
that you say that because
I went up to a
website called learning web GL,
and they have an example
where they drew a triangle
and a square. And I
started, I said, Oh, I'll
do a view source. And
this will be lovely. And
I can see in here,
square Vertex position buffer, and
they're making a raise of
data and vertices. And I
was immediately overwhelmed. And frankly,
a little disappointed because I'm,
I'm sure that from a,
from the perspective of someone
who does 3d all the
time, they might say, ah,
these are familiar APIs to
direct X, but to someone
who just wants a square,
it was immediately overwhelming. Absolutely.
Absolutely. And this is exactly
the price you have to
pay today. If you want
to use the rope off
your GPU, you have to
go really at low-level communicating
with your GPU, but in
a really Astra understand way.
So is that why the
kind of the next obvious
thing is to use an
API on top of that?
Like whether it be Babylon
or some of your company.
Yeah. It's three GS mainly.
Yeah. It's exactly why four
years ago, mr. Loops the
creator or into your thorough
offer three GS that he
had working on three years.
And it's exactly why we
decided with some friends in
France to create baby NGS
a way for web developers
to continue using JavaScript like
they want without having all
the burden of the prelim
being of windshield. Mr. Dube,
D O O B is
Ricardo Cabello from Spain. And
he is the creator of
three dot JS. And people
can go and search for
that as well. And the,
the idea behind these is
to layer more familiar metaphors
and more familiar terms on
top of that low level.
Exactly. We are talking about
camera lights, object, textures, something
sounds more like a movie,
you know, a movie Trinitonian,
you put your camera, you're
looking at something. And it's
easier to understand when you
are not a genius in
three D and maths, And
I'm not, I'm definitely not,
but I do want to
make a, you know, interactions
without having to do the
low level stuff. Would anyone
want to use the low
level stuff? Who isn't a
library provider? Is there any
reason for a listener who's
learning about web GL for
the first time to call
these low level APIs? Or
should they always consider using
something higher level? I think
that's in almost whole the
case. The frameworks are enough.
And if you want to
use all evil, just at
a specific moment, you can,
it's not something that is
a black box. All the
frameworks that are working on
top of webs yet are
really open. So you can
do whatever you want with
the lowly Valencia and keep
continuing using the frame rockets.
Oh, okay. So that if
I decide to go and
create something in Babylon or
in three, if I need
to do something very low
level, I don't have to
really ask the library to
get out of the way
it's not hiding everything. No,
absolutely. We try to do
that on every piece of
. For instance, each time
we do something, there is
an event that hollow you
to take the control over
the specific features. For instance,
you want to add shadows
and you don't want to
do that the way we
are doing them, you just
have to override, let's say
a specific behavior we are
working on and write your
own. And in this case,
you will have to discuss
with website. So w I,
I wrote a little blog
post about making three D
games in a browser. And
I talk about both Babylon
and three, and right off
the bat, you make an
engine and a scene, and
then you set up your
camera. Yep. You can also
set up a directional light
and you're describing these coordinates
in XYZ space, but it
wasn't clear to me what
those numbers meant in the
sense of, are we talking
about pixels or feet or
arbitrary? How do I know?
We know, I said, like,
I think I set up
a camera at like one
comma, this comma, that, but
I don't really understand where
I was setting that camera
because I didn't have a
sense of, of a unit.
Yeah. And this is a
funny thing. There is no
unit, the units, for instance,
if you create a vector
or like zero one zero,
then the one is whatever
you want. It's can, it
can be one meter, one
centimeter, sorry. I'm French. So
I use meter and centimeters
or one mice or whatever
you need. It's just up
to you to keep that
constraint. I mean, if it
was considered that one unit
is one meter, then each
time you will build a
cube of one by one
by one, then it will
be one by one by
one meter. There is no
fourth unit. Okay. So it's
whatever unit makes me happy.
Absolutely. I see. So if
I have some existing 3d
content or an application that
has some expectations, as long
as those measurements are relative
to each other in a
reasonable way, I could use
those. Absolutely. Exactly. Oh, it
works. Oh, okay. So I
could go from zero to
a hundred or zero to
one. It doesn't really matter.
Yeah. We try to keep
value. Let's say from zero
to 1000, because it's clear,
but if you want to
go from zero to 1 million,
it's possible In, in Babylon,
once I've set up my
engine, my scene, I've set
my camera up. Maybe I've
added a little bit of
light. You've got this thing
called a mask. Yep. What
does it mean? It's an
object. It's the object. This
is your metric. Ms. She's
a group of human tree
and a lot of information
like positions, killing rotation. Is
it visible? Is it invisible?
Is it almost transparent? All
the thing that help them
in NGS render an object
on the screen. Hi, this
is Scott. I really appreciate
our sponsors because they make
the show possible. Today's show
is sponsored by developer express,
become a UI superhero with
dev express controls and libraries
deliver elegant.net solutions that address
customer needs today by leveraging
your existing knowledge, you can
build next generation touch enabled
solutions for tomorrow. You can
download your free 30 day
trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com. So if
I said, Babylon dot mesh
dot create box, this is
something that you're dealing with
internally. Like you have these
API, you have these, these
functions where, you know what
a box looks like, and
you've just set up a
series of shapes. Absolutely. This
is exactly how it works.
You create, we call create
books and then internally, internally,
sorry, I'm creating all the
Vertex, all the dots in
space. And I gathered them
using faces to give you
a box. And how many
different kinds of primitive objects
do you provide? We have
books, fear torus through is
not and plain. And I
think a tourist is like
a donut. He had done
it and the tourist not,
is it the build on
it? Ah, okay. So What
do I do though? When
I've got, you know, some
existing 3d asset, like I
see on Skype here that
you have cost from Babylon
five, let's say I have
a three D model of
cost that I made in
some other application, And this
is something we are really
working on. We try to
make as simple as possible
for the developer to get
data from the three D
world. So for instance, we
have a, an exporter from
Brenda, which is free three
D modeling tool, and we
also have an excellent three
DS max exporter. So you
just have to bring some
DLL into your three years
max in station four there.
And then we will be
able to just push a
button and everything that we
have into three years, max
will be saved into a
file. And from your
JavaScript code, you just have
one line of code to
load this stuff, but we
don't fate. So instead of
having books, Cuban, whatever you
can just create using JavaScript,
you will be able to
have your coach a on
object or whatever your spaceship
you need to have. You
have HTML and JavaScript. This
dot Babylon file is a
set of vertices. It's a,
it's a format. I presume
it's some kind of Jason
format, Easy to do something
from it. Yeah. We wanted
to keep it simple as
possible. And it's everything related
to us. I mean, there
is lights inside the materials,
textures, obviously the meshes, all
the object and the shoe
matrix, everything that you need
to have a full scene.
If you go to
dot com, you will see
a lot of really complex
scenes. We created with three
DS max Explorer, and there
are just one we don't
fight. So if I go
up there right now, I'm
at Babylon JS the most
impressive one, the one that's
blown my mind is the
Assassin's creed pirates. Cause I
play Assassin's creed and this
is a ship racing game.
Absolutely. And then when I
hit that and you know,
it takes a moment to
load what all is happening
here is this megabytes of
information. Oh yeah. I think
that's the size of all
the scene. Meaning every kind
of weather, the weather, all
the textures for the ships
is around 40 megabytes of
data, 40 megabytes. And this
isn't yeah. Four, zero 40
megabytes of Jason. I presume
that the next step beyond
the structures and the scene
is the Textures. Yep. The
textures are pretty easy and
we are using something really
interesting, which is the DDS.
DDS is a compressed format.
And as opposed to heat
off using a Jew JPEG
for incense, JPEG is also
compressed between you want to
download the JPEG into the
GPU memory. You have to
earn compress it and save
it and compressed into the
GPU memory for, with DDS,
we have the ability to
just load the DDS, like
it, save it into the
GPU memory. And the GPU
is able to uncompress it
when it needs to render
your objects, for instance, And
DDS, was that not direct
draw surfaces, the name of
where that originally came from.
Absolutely. It's, it's an invention
of Microsoft, but that's now
something that everyone uses. Yeah.
And we have a lot
of global documentation around, So
this is a, it sounds
scary, all these different formats
and three letter acronyms, but
that really is just another
kind of compressed picture. It's
it's like a JPEG or
a PNG of sorts. It's
like a date. Yeah. But
if I understand correctly, this
format is, is little, is
a little bit lossy. Right.
But the compression ratio is
fixed. There's basically like how,
how compressed do you want
it? And it's fixed and
it can be decompressed by
the hardware. So the work
for decompressing, this can happen
in the GPU itself. Yeah.
And in this case, you'd
save lots of memory because
if you have to save
an uncompressed GPS in memory,
it will take a lot
of megabytes of memory between
the DDS because it remains
compressed. Then you save a
lot of bandwidth. Ah, so
It's compressed in memory as
opposed to a JP that
turns into a bitmap. And
we've all been to web
pages before that have a
huge JPEGs and our browser
gets slowed down because it's
really just a giant bitmap
in memory. Absolutely. Ah, okay.
So then the GPU, again,
another example of using the
GPU to the fullest, does
the decompression in the hardware
as it needs to Yes.
And if you take the
example of  to the
demonstration we did here, if
you look at the sky
box, I mean the sky,
then the sky needs six
different texture because you have
to think about a box
that is surrounding all the
scene. And each time you
look around then the three
D engine is showing you
the right face of the
cube and you have this
impression of being surrounded by,
through Skype. And to do
that, we need six differentiate
bag or just one DDS
because the DDS also as
the ability or inability to
save many phases in it,
we call that the cube
texture. Ah, okay. Now I
made by stealing someone else's
code, because that seems to
be the way things are
done on the web, a
spinning cube with texture in
space. And I tried to
make them look the same.
I did one in Babylon
and one in three JS
and conceptually, they were very
similar. We had scenes and
acute geometry and I applied
a texture. But one of
the things that I noticed
immediately was that in Babylon,
I can grab the cube
and spin it around. I
had interaction, but I don't
remember writing any of that
work. Yeah. And you're right.
This is the foundation of
wogs. This is why we
decided to create something different
than 3g years through GSS
next to them through the
engine. But we wanted to
have something, we have a
different philosophy. We wanted something
that is really simple to
use, no need to add
cord. If you can do
something basically without no code
at all, then we will
do that for you. For
instance, as you mentioned, we
, we had to fight
for manipulation. We had to
brought forth everything that we
can add without giving you
the burden of doing it.
Does that take Babylon kind
of forward? Not necessarily as
a, as a 3d Library,
but more of a game
engine. Yeah, we think about
it as a game engine.
We wanted to think about
it like the IX and
a for the web. Ah,
interesting. Now I also notice,
and this is just subjective.
So forgive me if I'm
wrong, but it feels like
the cube in my, my
Babylon example has somehow smoother
sides while I'm three JS.
It ended up a little
bit aliased is that an
illusion That I'm seeing? We
are working a lot with
two different perceptions things when
you want to make it
rotate, we add some inertia.
So it feels like it's
more smooth and about rendering.
We also add some specific
post-process effects to add and
on all the rendering we
are doing. I see. So
this again gets to that
point that you're, you're optimizing
for a certain audience perhaps.
And again, we're not trying
to speak for the author
of three JS, but that,
that seems a little bit
closer to the metal. I'm
sure that I could add
the post-processing and the anti-icing
as well as the manipulation,
but you're doing that for
free. So you're trying to
basically make me successful without
me having to be very,
very good at three D.
Yeah. W we tried to
add a lot of things
for you, and instead of
asking you to add things,
I prefer asking you to
remove things. Ah, interesting. So
then in order to, I
would add things to the
three JS example to get
manipulation and I would have
to turn them off in
Babylon. Absolutely, exactly. The fields
of, No, I was looking
at the Assassin's creed example
and it appears that it
was made by the IEP
team, along with the folks
at, at Yes, it's a
partnership between  and Ubisoft.
We wanted to showcase the
fact that as you mentioned,
trust at the start of
this show, the web is
almost ready for gaming. I
mean, through gaming, AAA gaming
and you'd be served is
convinced that we will be
able to have really great
games without any plugin in
a browser. So they really
think That's going to happen.
So that means that I
would be able to get
a, you know, a steam
quality game at some point,
like a bastion or some
game that perhaps has already
cross-platform and run that in
the browser. Just fine. I
mean, we've, we've all seen
quake and the examples there's
always the, the Wolfenstein 3d
in the browser, but they're
talking about like Assassin's creed
quality game. Yes. Right now
we have to figure out
some specific points like IP
protection and all to monetize
things. So it's just a
beginning. Technically we can create
games. This is not a
problem of technical stuff or
JavaScript or whatever. We have
the, the Roper and access
to GPU. It's more about
monetization and ultra protect my
assets. So the Full access
to the GPU and the
browser's keeping us from that,
we know that JavaScript from
a speed perspective is near
native speed right now. And
certainly getting faster every day
there's memory issues. Presumably people
aren't used to a browser
taking up maybe four or
500 megs of Ram like
a game is, but I'm
sure they can get over
that. What about storage and
caching? Do I, if I
want to play Assassin's creed,
I'm going to go on
steam and download 15 gigabytes
of and, and store all
of that. If I was
going to play the equivalent
game in the browser, would
you have the browser kind
of keep a ring buffer
of just the textures and
the information I need for
the current level and then
maybe, or would I just
cash it all and have
a five or 10 gig
browser cache For Bobby Jones? Yes.
What we decided to do
is to use index DB
database of the web to
save everything locally. So this
means that the first time
you will connect to the
game, we will download for
you everything into the local
database, meaning that if you
want to go offline, you
can play, you can still
play the game, even a
flying because all the textures
and the resources are saved
locally. We have obviously some
limitation when it come to
speak about space, we can
go to 100 megabytes. It's
the limitation we have, but
it's, it's just a good
first idea. We can do
a lot of things with
a local case. We have
to figure out how to
do that. Like you do
that in stream, for instance.
Yeah. It is amazing though
how much you can do
with not a huge amount
of data. There's this really
cool example, odd Babylon JS
called Hill Valley. That is
basically it's the space where
Marty McFly parks his car
and goes to the clock
tower. It's an incredibly complicated
scene. I mean, it's effectively
the entire town square. You
can walk around and it's
only about 70 megabytes. Yep.
And we added a lot
of Easter eggs. If you
want to wander around, we
added some really cool stuff
around and it's just 70,
as you said, megabytes, and
it's just Jason, we are
working on a more compressed
file format to save base
right now. And I'm pretty
sure that we can do
that with just 50 minutes
Really, you know, it would,
it would be very interesting
to compare what an application
written in a traditional gaming
language looks like taking something
that's like maybe this Hill
Valley example in C or
C plus plus, and how
that would be different versus
writing it in JavaScript. I
mean, is this not just
trying to get it to
work in the browser, but
is it really a superior
way to deliver a three
D game? Yes, you can
reach a lot of people
with just a browser, right?
We can reach every people
that have computer today is
able to get a broader
it's free. You can just
download it. And now as
I'm Wandering around, I'm driving,
flying around Hill Valley right
now. And of course I
can, I have God mode
so I can go in
and out of walls and
things. I noticed that some
of the textures look amazing
far away, but if I
get close up, then I
can see, I can see
the JPEG Venus. You could,
you have different levels of
textures. Like you see in
3d games where it gets
better quality as it begins
to pop in. Yeah. If
we wanted to do that,
we can just add some
DDS because DDS integrate a
features called meet mapping and
meet mapping is a level
of quality for textures. If
you are closer to a
texture, then the texture will
be extremely neat and proceed.
And if you are going
for Verdun, we will use
a different development map. The
functionality works like this. You
have the full range, which
is the first level, let's
say 1000 by 1000. And
you have a single lever
of pipe, which is just
divided by two. So let's
say 500 by 500 and
so on and so on.
And automatically web GL is
able to pick the right
one based on your distance
from the object that you
are looking at. I see.
So then it becomes a
really an asset management problem.
More than it is anything
else. It's not an issue
of code. This is just
the, to the limits of
my artist's ability to create
textures. If I asked my
artists to redo this and
this, the scene we've just
did, yes. Then this problem
will go away, Got inside
the car here. And something
happened. I'm not sure if
that's one of the Easter
eggs I got inside Marty's
DeLorean. And then some, some
kind of cooler effect occurred.
I think you find one
of them. I have to
explore this. This is pretty
amazing stuff. Do you think
that this is going to
ha we're going to see
more people getting involved in
game creation because it's such
a more accessible way to
do it. Oh yeah, I
think so. If you are
looking at what unity announced,
unity three D announced for
their restaurant five, they will
be able to directly export
any, you need to gain
into a full web GL
stuff and look at also
what Firefox is doing with
ASM JS and it's all
around us. I'm pretty sure
that, yeah, let's say in
three or perhaps four years,
there will be a lot
of web GL games. That's
interesting. I, the idea that
that JavaScript is a compilation
target, you're saying web GL
and JavaScript as a compilation
target where a tool kits
like unity that are already
almost game generators, someone could
simply say export as web
based game. Yeah. And it's
something that you already notice
on your own blog when
you was talking about JavaScript,
easy assembler of the web.
Yep. Right, right now Java
script is just the support
of everything that if you
want to just be fully
cross-platform fantastic. Well, thank you
so much, David, for chatting
with me today. My pleasure.
Thank you so much. You
can go up and learn
more about Babylon js@babylonjs.com and
I'll put links in the
show notes to David on
Twitter and his blog, and
also his GitHub. This has
been another episode of Hanselminutes
and we'll see you again
next week.